If you're staring at 50 different
attributes in your Google Shopping feed
and you feel completely overwhelmed,
then you're actually looking at the
problem all wrong. For the last 10
years, I've lived inside these feeds.
It's one of my favorite things to do in
Google Ads. But I also don't have
unlimited time. The key isn't to try to
optimize everything. It is to split the
work into two distinct jobs. One is the
feed hygiene and the other one is what I
call the true feed optimization.
Now, hygiene is your foundation. It's a
pass or fail. Things like your GTIN and
availability, brand color, etc. Your
only job here is to be 100% accurate. It
does this doesn't make you a lot of
profit. It doesn't even do a lot to your
overall visibility and everything, but
it just stops you from getting
disqualified before the game even
starts. And there's an even bigger
impact of this over time, which I'll
share in this video. But once the
hygiene is done, then you almost never
have to touch it again and we can jump
into optimization. But 90% of the work
with feed optimization is done in the
first go. And in this video, I will show
you how to take the chaos out of feed
optimization and make it so simple you
just think, wow. Let's jump into it.
There's a why behind feed optimization.
And the number one thing is increased
visibility. A better feed means Google
understands your products better. Adding
all the attributes for a given product
means Google understand the product it
knows when to show you in this query
when it knows to show this kind of value
and more importantly as we move into an
AI first world it will be able to take
all that context that people will search
for I want to have a plant offis
friendly crossfit shoot that's that's
black that's less than $100. It can take
all those queries and that context and
use the attributes from your shopping
feed to find the right products
recommended at the right time. The
second one is of course like writing
keyword-rich titles is still even though
that's what we did 15 years ago when
this started, it's still Google's best
way to initially understand what search
queries to rank your products on.
Another one is creating a strong product
type taxonomy. think men's shoes,
sandals, then hiking sandals, it makes
it easier for Google to understand the
relations between products. And when
category of product does well for you
and it can then have a spillover effect
on the other products in that category
and show it more because hey, hiking
sandals are overall doing great, let's
show you other hiking sandals some more.
We don't know what Google will use in
the future when it comes to all these
attributes. And that's one key thing
about the the hygiene aspect of of feed
optimization. We don't know how Google
will use everything in the future. Right
now, Google is pulling in the brand and
the material and the size and the color
into the product cart. And we don't know
what else they will use. We don't know
all of a sudden they will if they'll
start using the energy efficiency rate.
We don't know if they'll start showing
the bundle price better. We don't know
if they'll start showing the unit price
better. We don't know if the energy
efficiency class of a fridge will start
being more important. We don't know all
these things. That's why you should just
add alt into it. Another reason why you
should optimize your feed comes back to
campaign structure. For instance, if you
don't have a strong product type
taxonomy, then you can't trust your
product type values for creating your
campaign structure. And again, the same
applies to every other attribute that
you want to use to split up your
campaigns by. So again, this all comes
back into feed optimization. We're going
to jump into exactly how we do this. I
break it down into two crucial stages.
First, I'll cover what I mentioned
before with the feed hygiene. It's an
essential non-negotiable foundation.
Then, we'll jump into the feed
optimization where we can use the values
and the attributes that we've added
during the feed hygiene stage. And there
we can then start optimizing and start
doing better. Now, let's start with the
actual feed hygiene where we do the core
feed buildout because optimizing a feed
means two things. One is to add all
relevant attributes and then optimize
individual attributes. And this is where
simplifying the process really really
works. And this is what makes me much
better at optimizing feeds than many
others is because I don't get confused
by these two aspects. Adding all
relevant attributes, yes, is a feed
optimization, but we don't have to
optimize all these different attributes.
They are black and white. Is the brand
attribute filled out correctly? Yes or
no. Is the availability in there? Yes or
no, etc., etc., etc. And the way I do
this is that I use an ocean template.
You can use a Google sheet. You can copy
this. You can do whatever you want. But
the key here is to go in and have a list
of all of the different attributes that
are here's all the attributes. Here's
all the advanced attributes and
descriptions of all them. What I then do
is I just like this takes five minutes.
I go through my feed and I go do we have
what's the status? Well, it is exists
and and like the ID exists and and it's
optimized. Is the condition there? Yes
or no? You would be surprised how often
a Shopify feed into for instance
channelable data feed watch doesn't have
condition because Shopify doesn't put it
in and 10 data feed and channelable
don't do it by themselves. So you're
going to go okay that needs to be
optimized. the uh the uh G10 is missing,
brand is missing, availability missing,
price exists and optimized, image link
is already good, the link exist,
optimized, etc., etc., etc. And then you
can go into saying, okay, this will then
automatically go in and only show you
the fields or attributes that you need
to optimize. And then I can go in and I
can just go, you know what, let's say I
have all these things and this one is
size is not relevant. Identify access is
not not relevant. Let's say I need to do
that is need to get this and this adult
is not relevant because I don't sell sex
toys. Uni buy price major is not
applicable. And then we go in and then
we just sit and we go okay I need to add
condition. I need to add GCN. I need to
add brand. I need to add availability. I
need to add gender etc etc. Super duper
easy. This is really the key part to
just make this as simple as possible
because we will split this up. Let's
then go into saying okay let's say the
title that I need to optimize it can be
done better description I can do better
our product or custom labels needs to be
uh done better okay the condition I'm
done with that G10 I'm done with that
brand I'm done with that availability
I'm done description done uh done
and now we can then go okay these are
the three attributes I just need to
optimize another aspect of going through
this is so you can go through yourself
and Okay, what's the importance? I
haven't put the importance in from the
get-go because it changes a little bit.
Obviously, anything that is required
when we say we go through this is just
required and it's an automatic high
priority because you can't run a feed
without it. Now, when we start coming
down to some of these, it becomes a
little bit more me. But the way I've
structured these is required,
recommended, and use relevant. Again,
required, which I grew. No need to go
through that again. Recommended. I do
recommend using sale price instead of
just overriding price when you have a
promotion. I do recommend having
additional images in your feed if you
have them. Do recommend adding shipping.
Normally you'll do it in the merchant
center settings unless you have a lot of
countries that you're running or there's
a very big difference between the
different products. Google product
category again recommended custom label
recommended etc etc. And then there's
these like so down to product type. This
is for everybody. It's recommended or
required for everybody. Now some of
these down here become required in
certain cases. So if we take apparel
then color size system type and just the
size material and gender and age group
are all very relevant. So for those I
actually say it's still required for you
to do but this then means we can go
through everything one by one and make
sure that they get added and this is the
big chunk of the initial time. For some
of you this will be super simple if you
already have the values in your system.
If you don't have these value, if you
don't have these attributes in your
e-commerce platform, this starts
becoming an issue. GTIN is a one of the
big ones where people go, I don't have
it. And that's an issue. So, the reason
why GCN is such an important attribute
is that it links your product to another
product that your competitor is selling.
So, if you both sell the same Nike shoe,
Google will use that GCIN on your
competitor's product and on your product
to say, "This is this product." So,
there's like a big product card that you
can get into. There is some things in
the Google Shopping Marketplace you can
get into, but there's also the sharing
of data. You share product ratings. So,
if your competitor has a particular Nike
shoe that shows up with 500 reviews, you
get the same. You get the exact same
reviews because it's a product review.
It's a product rating. So, it has
nothing to do with the store. There's
still there's also some learning that
takes place at the GTIN level. So if a
competitor have a GCIN you and and a
competitor have that GCIN on the same
product then Google will learn from the
competitor into your account and on your
account or your to your competitor not
in terms of performance but just this
product is relevant to be showing for
these search queries. So if your
competitor has this product showing for
this search query then you should
probably also because it's the same
product and then it will bundle some
learning there has nothing to do with
your account performance or smart
bidding how much you should bid for it
just whether or not this product is
eligible for the search query instead of
just relying on the title. So that's
something that can be really really
important otherwise it's all about just
filling them out and again some of this
can be difficult if you don't have it.
So try to go in and then say once you
have like attributes to optimize you go
you know what this is high priority once
you start getting down the line you go
okay I need to fill some of these things
out if unless you have thousands upon
thousands of products and even then
there's two things I want to say one is
using AI can actually be really really
valuable you can often get the AI to
read what the color is in terms of
creating either reax expressions or
simply just using some of the AI
features that for instance channelable
or other feed optimization tools have
makes it super easy. Start off just do
all your hygiene work. Make sure you get
everything in there because you'll see
it in a second when we start optimizing
the titles, product types, etc. Once you
get as much data in here as possible,
it'll be much easier to optimize rest of
the values. Now, we get to the feed
optimization part where we improve
individual attributes. And I usually
split this up into two. So we have for
improved visibility and we have
attributes that we optimize for analysis
and campaign structure purposes. Now if
we start with the title, the title is in
its most basic form a way for you to add
keywords you want to rank for. This
again like I've said before, we've done
this forever and the way to do this
overall is to think of all the different
attributes you have in your feed and
need to add them to the title. However,
you want to make sure that a you
frontload the most important information
because titles do get truncated which
mean they get limited for how much
they're shown and that changes. For
instance, if I'm a reseller and I sell
Nike running shoes, then having Nike as
the as as the first part of my title
works really well. If I'm a DC brand and
I only sell my own private label brand,
that has almost no importance and should
just either be at the end or not there
at all. The same thing goes into all the
different attributes that you have. So,
if I sell a medium-sized t-shirt, there
is no reason to put medium in the title.
And this something that gets often very
confused when people just go in and go,
you know what, look at all these
attributes I have. I will just take my
title and I will go brand plus title
plus gender plus model plus color plus
size plus material. And look how cool I
am. I created a product title. But it
doesn't make any sense. 90% of what I
just mentioned, nobody searches for in
this particular industry. is very very
different from industry to industry.
Nobody searches for a model number in
apparel. A lot of people search for a
model number in electronics or spare
parts. A lot of people will search for
the brand if it's a known brand. Nobody
will search for the brand if it's not a
known brand. We want to think through
and rank the different types of searches
or categories of searches and the
different attributes based on do we want
to put these into the title. If you have
very few products, again, I go less than
100. I'd even like to put in and say,
"Okay, let's get AI to write all our
titles from scratch." Takes about a
couple hours to go through, make sure
you qualify it. But that's another way
to do it. I see two types of mistakes
when it comes to optimizing product
titles. Number one is overdoing it, like
I just mentioned, and the second mistake
is not doing it at all. If you need to
make a mistake, if you're worried about
uh overdoing it or underdoing it, overdo
it. It has a minimal impact on your CTR
if you overdo it. and it has a huge
impact on your overall visibility if you
don't optimize your titles at all. The
second thing uh you should optimize for
visibility is a little bit out of left
field but it's product ratings. Now
there's product ratings and seller
ratings. A seller rating is your store
reviews. That's what you can see on your
search ads when you get ratings in
there. But product ratings is something
else. There's a review specifically
associated to a product uh to a product
ID and that's a completely separate feed
you need to send in through the merchant
center. You go a lot of detail with the
product reviews but let's just start
with the basics. In order to be eligible
to get product ratings you need to
generate and send 50 product reviews in
total, not per product. There's a little
thing here into the merchant center in
order to get access to add product the
product ratings feed. Once you've added
50 product reviews you have added the
feed with your product ratings. This
will give you access to ratings inside
of product ads. I find two things here.
If you only have 52, I often go, uh,
don't do it unless you're selling
products that everybody else is selling
because once you generate the 50 product
reviews, then you enable product
ratings. And like I mentioned before,
you get the same ratings in as the next
guy for the same GTN product. But if you
sell your own private label and you
upload 50 in total and this product has
eight reviews, this product has three
reviews, immediately makes me think,
nah, there's not that many people who
are liking this product. So, in my
opinion, unless there's not that many
people who are liking this product,
unless you have a strong review base,
don't add product ratings until you have
them. Third one to optimize is is
images. And I've put it in a little bit
low on the list because it is typically
a nice to have. The way that we optimize
it is that it can be a product shot
versus a model shot. It can be a closeup
or it can be a completely different
photo. And again, I call this a nice to
have. The fewer products you have, the
better you can test this because it can
take some time to find a new and better
picture. But if let's just say you have
a thousand products or more than a
thousand products, then it becomes
almost meaningless unless your hero
image, the main image that gets sent
from your e-commerce platform is really,
really bad. So, here's an example of
something really, really bad. If we look
out to the left, we can see that we have
a beard growth kit uh from Copenhagen
Grooming, and they're also selling the
same product or similar products through
vendors or retailers. As we can see
here, it's not the exact same product
because there's a price difference, and
that has also to do with how how how
many days of supply there's in there and
stuff like that. However, if we just
take that part out that is a different
product, then notice that you can bar
like I've on purpose not made it too big
here because if you look at this from a
mobile phone or then then the the
product ad in Google is are pretty
small. Can you see what it is on the
first image? I can't and I I I know what
it is. Can you see what it contains? And
it's mainly to do with that stupid black
box that they have put in as a
background. This works really really
well when you look at the big image on
the store. Um, but it's much better to
see the second one where you see, okay,
this is mus and this is what is actually
in a similar case. Then you can see
grooming also sell with masses and with
nice hair and from apple all the way out
to the to the right where you see this
red box with white products inside. This
works well. You can like see there's
different things in there. There's three
to four things and it's a lot easier to
see. are still saying that the image can
be optimized. But compared to the
primary main image all the way out to
the left from Copenhagen grooming, this
is a really poor image. And that's an
example where I would go, you know what,
we have to improve. Another thing I just
wanted to mention here, you notice how
MAS and Nice Hair and Apo has the same
product. And MAS and Nice Hair have the
same amount of product reviews on the
product. That's not because they have
accidentally sent in the same amount of
products or sorry reviews for the two
products in their individual merchant
centers. That is the total amount of
ratings that Google know exists for this
GCN. The reason why it's not being shown
for Apple is because Apple does not have
access to product ratings yet. They have
not sent in product ratings that they
themselves have generated. So they don't
get access to the total pool of product
ratings. Now the next one is description
product category and product type. Let's
just try to just go through these a
little bit fast because they're not
super important. The description is
usually pulled from the website. Many
people will say you need to optimize
your descriptions. I haven't optimized a
description in many years. In most
cases, it's not really important. Mostly
the description you get from the website
is more than enough. Like even though
there's some evidence that Google looks
for keywords in the description, there's
something you can do here. But don't
just don't waste your time. Again, I
don't think you should spend a lot of
time there. I haven't optimized
description in years. The Google product
category is kind of the same thing.
Generally, Google is good at choosing
the Google product category for you. But
I've seen examples where Google choose
the wrong one. In my opinion, that shows
that the algorithm in Google have miscar
categorized your product and that will
have an impact on what search queries
your product is shown for. Titles will
will enable you to override this and
that titles are the most important
factor for where you're ranking. But if
Google is saying that this sofa is a is
a lounge chair, that's one of those
small inconsistencies that over time can
start adding up. Now, the product type
is a is a rather new attribute to be
important from a visibility standpoint,
but slides from training at Google have
shown that the product type is used on
the front end, which again means that
it's used for visibility. So creating a
strong prototype structure that includes
keywords at every level can have an
impact on what search you're shown for.
Now, I have seen this be way overdone
where you take your product type and you
make it basically unusable from an
analysis standpoint. And that's the
other main reason why in Savvy we've
always optimized product types is to do
proper product analysis. It's simply
just easier to have a really good
taxonomy that groups all shoes at the
same product type level, the same
subcategory, etc., etc., etc. makes it
really easy to analyze what the product
performance is and again it also helps
Google understand what type of product
this is and what search queries you
should show for and when performance
goes up one then the rest should also go
up and work together and all this stuff
it works well but if you as an as an
example that I've seen you have a
product and you add four five six seven
different levels you know unless you're
really going to use those additional
levels don't overdo it like you don't
have to to over stuff keywords into your
product types. It is overkill. Now, the
second part of the optimization part is
for analysis or campaign structure. And
this is where custom labels come in.
Custom labels have nothing to do with
with visibility. Adding keywords to it
have no impact whatsoever. Google
doesn't look at how they're being uh
grouped together like with product types
and brand and stuff like that. So, don't
worry about any of that part right now.
My favorite custom labels are bestseller
like categorizing if if product is a
bestseller or not and also the opposite
if it's what we call a sabotur where
it's just it's an unprofitable product
no matter what we do from a smart
bidding perspective. My other favorite
is if it's on sale uh again grouping
products individually whether or not
it's on sale or not and also just
understanding how much to do seasonal
bid adjustments when you do it makes a
lot of sense. The price range I like it
because again you can say okay how do
this high AOB product actually perform
then it starts becoming more of a case
by case basis like seasonality whether
or not product should be excluded
whether or not it's new what the margin
is what's the delivery time like really
look at what your business is because
that's where it really comes into handy
when it comes to optimizing your feed
there's a couple of ways to actually do
it and that's not what we're going to
we're not going to go into details
around it just wanted to touch how to
actually optimize it and what software
to use. Now you can manage feeds
manually like with Google Sheets or
directly connecting to uh to the
merchant center. Then there are third
party tools that can help automate and
scale the process. I just want to say
there's no value in just running your
feed through a feed optimization tool
and not applying any rules. You need to
apply rules. You need to actually
improve and change the attributes uh
that goes from your your your e-commerce
platform into the feed tool over to
Google Merchant Center. If you don't
make any changes inside the tool, it
doesn't work. Just sending it in through
a tool doesn't have an impact. So, some
of the most common options on the
software side is Channable and data feed
watch. And if you're a smaller brand
that is already on Shopify, something
like S process does a good and simple
job. If you found this video helpful,
hit that subscribe button, ring the bell
for more e-commerce tips and Google ads.
And I just want to ask you, what's the
first thing you're going to optimize in
your feed? What's the one thing you're
going to implement from this video? Let
me know in the comments below.